Elephants are the largest existing land animals. Three living species 
are currently recognised: the African bush elephant, the African forest 
elephant, and the Asian elephant. They are the only surviving members 
of the family Elephantidae and the order Proboscidea. The order was 
formerly much more diverse during the Pleistocene, but most species 
became extinct during the Late Pleistocene epoch. Distinctive features 
of elephants include a long proboscis called a trunk, tusks, large ear 
flaps, pillar-like legs, and tough but sensitive skin. The trunk is 
used for breathing and is prehensile, bringing food and water to the 
mouth, and grasping objects. Tusks, which are derived from the incisor 
teeth, serve both as weapons and as tools for moving objects and digging. 
The large ear flaps assist in maintaining a constant body temperature 
as well as in communication. African elephants have larger ears and 
concave backs, whereas Asian elephants have smaller ears, and convex 
or level backs.

Elephants are scattered throughout sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia, and 
Southeast Asia and are found in different habitats, including savannahs, 
forests, deserts, and marshes. They are herbivorous, and they stay near 
water when it is accessible. They are considered to be keystone species, 
due to their impact on their environments. Elephants have a 
fission–fusion society, in which multiple family groups come together 
to socialise. Females (cows) tend to live in family groups, which can 
consist of one female with her calves or several related females with 
offspring. The leader of a female group, usually the oldest cow, is 
known as the matriarch.

Males (bulls) leave their family groups when they reach puberty and may 
live alone or with other males. Adult bulls mostly interact with family 
groups when looking for a mate. They enter a state of increased 
testosterone and aggression known as musth, which helps them gain 
dominance over other males as well as reproductive success. Calves are 
the centre of attention in their family groups and rely on their 
mothers for as long as three years. Elephants can live up to 70 years 
in the wild. They communicate by touch, sight, smell, and sound; 
elephants use infrasound and seismic communication over long distances. 
Elephant intelligence has been compared with that of primates and 
cetaceans. They appear to have self-awareness, and appear to show 
empathy for dying and dead individuals of their kind.

African bush elephants and Asian elephants are listed as endangered and 
African forest elephants as critically endangered by the International 
Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). One of the biggest threats to 
elephant populations is the ivory trade, as the animals are poached for 
their ivory tusks. Other threats to wild elephants include habitat 
destruction and conflicts with local people. Elephants are used as 
working animals in Asia. In the past, they were used in war; today, 
they are often controversially put on display in zoos, or exploited 
for entertainment in circuses. Elephants have an iconic status in 
human culture and have been featured in art, folklore, religion, 
literature, and popular culture.